Add a doc about writing plugins in Kotlin (#24286)
gradle/gradle: subprojects/docs/src/docs/userguide/developing-plugins/writing_in_kotlin.adoc

= Writing Gradle plugins in Kotlin

In addition to <<kotlin_dsl.adoc, writing build scripts scripts>>, Gradle also supports writing plugins in https://www.jetbrains.com/opensource/kotlin/[Kotlin].

There are multiple options to write your Kotlin plugins as well as multiple compatibility considerations. This page is non-exhaustive list of dependencies and compiler configurations and their impacts in terms of compatibility and usability.

It also describes the different development plugins to help you set up these different options.

[[sec:dependencies]]
== Different dependencies

Like other JVM projects, Gradle plugins are jar files with dependencies. Unlike other JVM projects, Gradle provides fixed versions of some dependencies at runtime. Those dependencies are `compileOnly` dependencies and need to be compatible with the version of Gradle your plugin is running in.

If you are writing convention plugins, this is usually not an issue. But if you distribute your plugins, you should pay attention to their compatibility.

[[sec:gradle_api]]

> === gradleApi()
> 
> ```kotlin
> dependencies {
>     compileOnly(gradleApi())
> }
> ```
> 
> `gradleApi()` is the primary way of interacting with the https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/index.html[Gradle core].
> 
> It is provided by the version of Gradle you're using to build your plugin. It is built the first time you run a build and contains all the symbols in your current version of Gradle. You will usually find it under `~/.gradle/caches/$version/generated-gradle-jars/gradle-api-$version.jar`.
> 
> Because `gradleApi()` uses the same version as the one you're currently running, it's easy to use symbols that are not present in previous versions of Gradle. If your plugin is run by an older version that is missing such a symbol, your plugin will throw a `NoSuchMethodError` at runtime.
> 
> Note: Because it is provided by Gradle at runtime, `gradleApi()` should be a `compileOnly` dependency.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
=== The Gradle API 

All plugins use the https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/index.html[Gradle Core API] to configure a Gradle build. The Gradle API must be added as a build compile-time dependency using the helper function `gradleApi()`

```kotlin
dependencies {
    compileOnly(gradleApi())
}
```

TIP: `gradleApi()` must be a `compileOnly` dependency, because the correct Gradle API will be provided by Gradle at runtime.

=== Version of the Gradle API Version

The Gradle API version provided by `gradleApi()` is the same as the version of Gradle used to build the plugin. 

For example, if the plugin is built using Gradle version 7.6.1, then `gradleApi()` also be version 7.6.1. If the plugin is later built with Gradle 8.0.2, then the `gradleApi()` will change to be version 8.0.2.

This implicit link between affects the Gradle versions your plugin supports. It's easy to build a plugin using one version of Gradle that that has functions or classes that are not present in other versions of Gradle.

This might result in runtime exceptions, such as `NoSuchMethodError`, if a plugin uses functionality of the Gradle API that is missing in the Gradle being used to run the plugin. This might happen the plugin is run by an older Gradle version that is missing a function or class, _or_ if the plugin uses function or class that has been removed in newer versions (which can happen when using deprecated or internal Gradle features).

Supporting different versions of Gradle can be tested using TestKit[https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/test_kit.html#sub:gradle-runner-gradle-version].
````

[[sec:redistributed_gradle_api]]

> === Redistributed Gradle API
> 
> 
> ```kotlin
> dependencies {
>     compileOnly("dev.gradleplugins:gradle-api:$version")
> }
> ```
> 
> The https://docs.nokee.dev/manual/gradle-plugin-development.html[Nokee redistributed Gradle API artifacts] are like `gradleApi()` except they allow to specify a version.
> 
> Doing this, you're not risking to use removed APIs. On the other hand, you cannot use newer APIs if your plugin is running on a recent version of Gradle.
> 
> Note: Because it is provided by Gradle at runtime, `gradle-api` should be a `compileOnly` dependency.

Reviewer: Some tweaks/tidying up grammar/formatting

````suggestion
=== Redistributed Gradle API

To avoid the implicit link on a Gradle version that comes with using `gradleApi()`, an alternative is to use the https://docs.nokee.dev/manual/gradle-plugin-development.html[Nokee redistributed Gradle API artifacts]. These are like `gradleApi()` except they allow specifying a specific version of the Gradle API.

```kotlin
dependencies {
    compileOnly("dev.gradleplugins:gradle-api:8.0.2")
}
```

TIP: Because it is provided by Gradle at runtime, `gradle-api` must be a `compileOnly` dependency.

This makes the version of the Gradle API being used to build the plugin more explicit, removing the ambiguity avoids the implicit link between `gradleApi()` and the build version of Gradle.

On the other hand, you cannot use newer APIs if your plugin is running on a recent version of Gradle.
````

Author: > compileOnly("dev.gradleplugins:gradle-api:8.0.2")

FWIW, I'm always a bit wary of putting hardcoded versions in codeblocks because they do not age well. I guess asciidocs allow to have variables, I'll look into this.

Author: I pushed some changes [there](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/pull/24286/commits/41ee911b0719d9f9495800a3b31a85a0d1183ca7). It's a bit funky because it uses the current SNAPSHOT version like `8.2-20230310230000+0000`. But I think in the end it's acceptable because the published docs will use stable.

= Writing Gradle plugins in Kotlin

> In addition to <<kotlin_dsl.adoc, writing build scripts scripts>>, Gradle also supports writing plugins in https://www.jetbrains.com/opensource/kotlin/[Kotlin].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to <<kotlin_dsl.adoc, writing build scripts>>, Gradle also supports writing plugins in https://www.jetbrains.com/opensource/kotlin/[Kotlin].
```

Author: Thanks!

There are multiple options to write your Kotlin plugins as well as multiple compatibility considerations. This page is non-exhaustive list of dependencies and compiler configurations and their impacts in terms of compatibility and usability.

It also describes the different development plugins to help you set up these different options.

[[sec:dependencies]]
== Different dependencies

Like other JVM projects, Gradle plugins are jar files with dependencies. Unlike other JVM projects, Gradle provides fixed versions of some dependencies at runtime. Those dependencies are `compileOnly` dependencies and need to be compatible with the version of Gradle your plugin is running in.

If you are writing convention plugins, this is usually not an issue. But if you distribute your plugins, you should pay attention to their compatibility.

[[sec:gradle_api]]
=== The Gradle API

All plugins use the https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/index.html[Gradle Core API] to configure a Gradle build. The Gradle API must be added as a build compile-time dependency using the helper function `gradleApi()`

[source,kotlin]
----
dependencies {
    compileOnly(gradleApi())
}
----

> TIP: `gradleApi()` must be a `compileOnly` dependency, because the correct Gradle API will be provided by Gradle at runtime.

Author: > The `java-gradle-plugin` plugin automatically adds `gradleApi()` to `api`

I've always wondered the reason behind that actually. Is there a specific reason or is it just historical? Doesn't feel right to pull `gradleApi()` in the runtime classpath (even though as you state later those dependencies aren't propagated so it's basically the same result but still feels wrong)

> Given it's automatically added by `java-gradle-plugin` and that plugin should be used when developing the Gradle plugin, there is no need to declare a dependency on the Gradle API.

Agreed but I still think it's important to be aware what `gradleApi()` is? Maybe change the wording to something like this?

```markdown
TIP: `gradleApi()` is added to the `api` configuration by the `java-gradle-plugin` so you don't need to add it manually. If you do, it should be a `compileOnly` dependency, because the correct Gradle API will be provided by Gradle at runtime.
```

> Gradle doesn't provide any guidelines on support libraries for plugins. [...] supporting libraries must be published in Maven Central, which happens to be mirrored through the plugin portal so the plugin resolution can find them.

Agree this is weird and the main reason why I publish my plugins to both portal and Maven Central. 

All in all, looks like we need to move these Gradle APIs considerations to the [Implementing Plugins](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/implementing_gradle_plugins.html) page. And then maybe link them from the Kotlin specific one? Let's wait a bit for Gradle's team feedback and if they're OK with it we can update this PR?

> TIP: `gradleApi()` must be a `compileOnly` dependency, because the correct Gradle API will be provided by Gradle at runtime.

Reviewer 3: > TIP: `gradleApi()` is added to the `api` configuration by the `java-gradle-plugin` so you don't need to add it manually

If `gradleApi()` is added by `java-gradle-plugin`, there's no need to adding it anyway.

==== Version of the Gradle API Version

The Gradle API version provided by `gradleApi()` is the same as the version of Gradle used to build the plugin.

> For example, if the plugin is built using Gradle version 7.6.1, then `gradleApi()` also be version 7.6.1. If the plugin is later built with Gradle {gradleVersion}, then the `gradleApi()` will change to be version {gradleVersion}.

Author: Thanks a lot for all the work on this 😃  !

This implicit link between affects the Gradle versions your plugin supports. It's easy to build a plugin using one version of Gradle that that has functions or classes that are not present in other versions of Gradle.

> This might result in runtime exceptions, such as `NoSuchMethodError`, if a plugin uses a functionality of the Gradle API that is missing in the Gradle being used to run the plugin. This might happen the plugin is run by an older Gradle version that is missing a function or class, _or_ if the plugin uses a function or class that has been removed in newer versions (which can happen when using deprecated or internal Gradle features).

Author: Right 👍 Got confused between "a feature" but "the functionality", thanks!

> This might result in runtime exceptions, such as `NoSuchMethodError`, if a plugin uses functionality of the Gradle API that is missing in the Gradle being used to run the plugin. This might happen the plugin is run by an older Gradle version that is missing a function or class, _or_ if the plugin uses function or class that has been removed in newer versions (which can happen when using deprecated or internal Gradle features).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This might result in runtime exceptions, such as `NoSuchMethodError`, if a plugin uses a functionality of the Gradle API that is missing in the Gradle being used to run the plugin. This might happen the plugin is run by an older Gradle version that is missing a function or class, _or_ if the plugin uses a function or class that has been removed in newer versions (which can happen when using deprecated or internal Gradle features).
```

Supporting different versions of Gradle can be tested using https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/test_kit.html#sub:gradle-runner-gradle-version[TestKit].

[[sec:redistributed_gradle_api]]
=== Redistributed Gradle API

To avoid the implicit link on a Gradle version that comes with using `gradleApi()`, an alternative is to use the https://docs.nokee.dev/manual/gradle-plugin-development.html[Nokee redistributed Gradle API artifacts]. These are like `gradleApi()` except they allow specifying a specific version of the Gradle API.

[subs="attributes"]
[source,kotlin]
----
dependencies {

>     compileOnly("dev.gradleplugins:gradle-api:{gradleVersion}")

Reviewer 4: 🔍 Even though the coordinate of the redistributed API is correct, the version part may sometimes differ from the exact Gradle version. The reason is that we can't overwrite the artifacts once published. If we need to patch them further, i.e. when we put the time into fixing some of the issues with redistributing the API, the plan is to release another version. We would use the version scheme `{gradleVersion}-1`, `{gradleVersion-2}`, etc. It's unclear if we should make the declaration more complicated to future proof. Instead, we recommend using the latest version of `dev.gradleplugins.gradle-plugin-development` so users can use `gradleApi("{gradleVersion}")`, which would account for any patching. The helper method works for both Groovy and Kotlin DSL. That is until Gradle releases the same API and breaks our plugin.

Author: Thanks for clarifying this up. I've never been hit by this so looks OK for me to leave it under the radar. Or if you have a link, we could mention it quickly and users who want more details could follow the link.

Reviewer 4: It's a good point, and I should add a note as I see more and more projects using the coordinate directly. I opened [this issue](https://github.com/gradle-plugins/toolbox/issues/90).

Reviewer 5: > Instead, we recommend using the latest version of dev.gradleplugins.gradle-plugin-development so users can use gradleApi("{gradleVersion}"), which would account for any patching.

How about the case when different versions of "dev.gradleplugins:gradle-api" is added as `compileOnly` dependencies to the Gradle plugin variants? I think proposed plugin will not do it?

}
----

TIP: Because it is provided by Gradle at runtime, `gradle-api` must be a `compileOnly` dependency.

This makes the version of the Gradle API being used to build the plugin more explicit, removing the ambiguity avoids the implicit link between `gradleApi()` and the build version of Gradle.

> On the other hand, you cannot use newer APIs if your plugin is running on a recent version of Gradle.

Reviewer 4: 🔍 With the redistributed Gradle API, you can create multiple source sets, each targeting a different Gradle API. Solving the issue exposed here. However, all the wiring needs to be done by hand. We hope to offer a convenient solution soon in the [Toolbox project](https://github.com/gradle-plugins/toolbox).

[[sec:gradle_kotlin_dsl]]
=== gradleKotlinDsl()

[source,kotlin]
----
dependencies {
    compileOnly(gradleKotlinDsl())
}
----

The `gradleKotlinDsl()` contains helpers to work better with Kotlin.

For an example:

* `tasks.withType<Jar> {}` (instead of `tasks.withType(Jar::class.java) {}`)
* `val commonMain by getting {}` (instead of `getByName("commonMain") {}`)
* `"implementation"("group:artifact:version")` (instead of `add("implementation", "group:artifact:version")`)

> * Even `gradleKotlinDsl()` is provided by `gradleKotlinDsl()` !

Reviewer 2: Inception 🤣

> You can use optionally it to build your plugins, but it's not mandatory.

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
You can use it optionally to build your plugins, but it's not mandatory.
```

It is part of the Gradle distribution. You will find it under `~/.gradle/wrapper/dists/gradle-$version-bin/$sha/gradle-$version/lib/gradle-kotlin-dsl-$version.jar`.

> When writing `build.gradle.kts`, `gradleKotlinDsl()` is in the classpath and provide helpers to work better with Kotlin.

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
When writing `build.gradle.kts`, `gradleKotlinDsl()` is in the classpath and provides helpers to work better with Kotlin.
```

> TIP: Because it is provided by Gradle at runtime, `gradle-api` must be a `compileOnly` dependency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TIP: Because it is provided by Gradle at runtime, `gradleKotlinDsl()` must be a `compileOnly` dependency.
```

> TIP: Because it is provided by Gradle at runtime, `gradleKotlinDsl()` must be a `compileOnly` dependency.

Reviewer 4: 🔍 I believe the `compileOnly` recommendation has the same problems as explained for the `gradleApi()` dependency.

[[sec:kotlin_stdlib]]
=== kotlin-stdlib

[source,kotlin]
----
dependencies {

>     compileOnly("org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-stdlib:$version")

Reviewer 4: 🥇 To help with cases like this, the [Toolbox project offers a Gradle Runtime Compatibility class to map this knowledge](https://github.com/gradle-plugins/toolbox/blob/main/subprojects/gradle-plugin-development/src/main/java/dev/gradleplugins/GradleRuntimeCompatibility.java#L175). It offers other API as well like the [minimum supported Java version per Gradle version](https://github.com/gradle-plugins/toolbox/blob/main/subprojects/gradle-plugin-development/src/main/java/dev/gradleplugins/GradleRuntimeCompatibility.java#L132) and, soon, the [latest patch version of a minor version](https://github.com/gradle-plugins/toolbox/blob/main/subprojects/gradle-plugin-development/src/main/java/dev/gradleplugins/GradleRuntimeCompatibility.java#L294) as well as the [latest patched minor version for a major version](https://github.com/gradle-plugins/toolbox/blob/main/subprojects/gradle-plugin-development/src/main/java/dev/gradleplugins/GradleRuntimeCompatibility.java#L351).

}
----

> The Kotlin compatibility matrix can be found in the https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/compatibility.html#kotlin[Gradle compatibility page]. If you want your plugin to be compatible with a given version of Gradle, you need to make sure to use a compatible version of kotlin-stdlib. For an example, if you need your plugin to be compatible with Gradle 7.0, you cannot use any Kotlin 1.5 only API (like https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/lowercase.htmllowercase) and need to compile against `kotlin-stdlib:1.4.31`.

Reviewer 2: This is not known so much in the plugin development world. Thanks for documenting it.

> The Kotlin compatibility matrix can be found in the https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/compatibility.html#kotlin[Gradle compatibility page]. If you want your plugin to be compatible with a given version of Gradle, you need to make sure to use a compatible version of kotlin-stdlib. For an example, if you need your plugin to be compatible with Gradle 7.0, you cannot use any Kotlin 1.5 only API (like https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/lowercase.htmllowercase) and need to compile against `kotlin-stdlib:1.4.31`.

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
The Kotlin compatibility matrix can be found in the https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/compatibility.html#kotlin[Gradle compatibility page]. If you want your plugin to be compatible with a given version of Gradle, you must use a compatible version of kotlin-stdlib. 
For example, if you need your plugin to be compatible with Gradle 7.0, you cannot use any Kotlin 1.5 only API (like https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.text/lowercase.htmllowercase) and need to compile against `kotlin-stdlib:1.4.31`.
```

[source,kotlin]
----
dependencies {
    compileOnly("org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-stdlib:1.4.31")
}
----

> For similar reasons, any transitive dependency of your plugin needs to use a `kotlin-stdlib` version compatible with the Gradle one. While you can ensure that at compile time for your own code, it's often more complicated for dependencies so make sure to test your plugins and/or double check your transitive dependencies.

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
For similar reasons, any transitive dependency of your plugin must use a `kotlin-stdlib` version compatible with the Gradle one. 
While you can ensure that at compile time for your code, it's often more complicated for dependencies, so test your plugins and/or double-check your transitive dependencies.
```

> Note: The `kotlin-stdlib` version is independent of your Kotlin Gradle Plugin version. You can use a newer Kotlin Stdlib version with an older `kotlin-stdlib` using the `apiVersion` compiler argument.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence is a bit confusing. Did you mean Kotlin Gradle Plugin instead?

Reviewer 2: Also, you can put a link to apiVersion section below.

Author: > The last sentence is a bit confusing. Did you mean Kotlin Gradle Plugin instead?

Completely! Thanks!

> Also, you can put a link to apiVersion section below.

Good idea 👍

> TIP: Because it is provided by Gradle at runtime, `gradle-api` must be a `compileOnly` dependency.

Reviewer 2: Is this tip necessary in this section? Looks like it is repeated.

Author: I like the symmetry of it. All sections have it so it felt "symmetrical" to keep it for `kotlin-stdlib` (and not `gradle-api` obviously 🤦 )

[[sec:kotlin_reflect]]
=== kotlin-reflect

[source,kotlin]
----
dependencies {
    compileOnly("org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-reflect:$version")
}
----

Not all plugins need `kotlin-reflect` but if yours does, the situation is the same as for `kotlin-stdlib`. `kotlin-reflect` needs to be compatible with the https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/compatibility.html#kotlin[target Gradle version]

TIP: Because it is provided by Gradle at runtime, `gradle-api` must be a `compileOnly` dependency.

[[sec:others]]
=== others (`implementation` or `api`)

You can add other non-compileOnly dependencies like in other JVM projects:

[source,kotlin]
----
dependencies {
    // Kotlin dependencies
    // ⚠️ make sure they do not depend on an incompatible version of kotlin-stdlib
    implementation("com.squareup:kotlinpoet:1.12.0")

    // Java dependencies
    implementation("asm:asm:3.3.1")
}
----

> These dependencies are not provided by Gradle at runtime and should use the `implementation` configuration (or `api` if part of your plugin API). Because Gradle may load different plugins with conflicting dependencies in the same https://dev.to/autonomousapps/build-compile-run-a-crash-course-in-classpaths-f4g[classloader], your plugin users may experience crashes if symbols are incompatible or missing. To mitigate those, you can relocate your dependencies.

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
Gradle does not provide these dependencies at runtime and should use the `implementation` configuration (or `api` if part of your plugin API). Because Gradle may load different plugins with conflicting dependencies in the same https://dev.to/autonomousapps/build-compile-run-a-crash-course-in-classpaths-f4g[classloader], your plugin users may experience crashes if symbols are incompatible or missing. To mitigate those, you can relocate your dependencies.
```

[[sec:compiler_options]]
== Different compiler configurations

You can choose different options to either improve the developer experience of writing plugins and/or improve compatibility with Gradle and Java in general.

[[sec:sam_with_receiver]]
=== `sam-with-receiver` compiler plugin

> Gradle comes with the https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/org/gradle/api/HasImplicitReceiver.html[@HasImplicitReceiver] annotation. When used in conjunction with Kotlin https://kotlinlang.org/docs/sam-with-receiver-plugin.html[sam-with-receiver compiler plugin], it can turn the parameter of https://kotlinlang.org/docs/fun-interfaces.html[Single Abstract Method (SAM)] interfaces like https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/org/gradle/api/Action.html[Action] into implicit receiver making your code look more like a DSL:

Reviewer 4: ❓ This should be the default which would remove the need to mention this here. It brings both DSL closer to a standard "Gradle DSL". I'm not much of a Kotlin developer so reading this is a bit confusing as to how, as a user, I can always get the "sam-with-receiver" behaviour.

Author: The `sam-with-receiver` is a very confusing default to me and judging by the amount of questions I see on this, I'm not the only one. As a Kotlin developer, I have the expectation that if I'm writing a `.kt` file then I should be able to use my usual Kotlin syntax. Kotlin makes it very easy to change a lambda parameter to a receiver (with `with` or `apply`) so things like sam-with-receiver and/or assignement compilers plugin contributes to making the process of writing plugins feel more magical than need be.

Of course if users want to use `sam-with-receiver` it's fine but I think it's important to be aware of the alternative.

Reviewer 4: The Gradle team should clarify if one is preferred in the future and only allow one (if that makes sense).

Reviewer 5: Hm, how instead of proposing `sam-with-receiver` usage - propose to add two methods in plugin api:
```
// Groovy/Java compatible
fun configureSomething(conf: Action<Something>) { .. }

// Kotlin compatible
fun configureSomething(conf: Something.() -> Unit) { ... }
```

[source,kotlin]
----
// Without sam-with-receiver
tasks.register("hello") { task ->
    // You need to use the lambda parameter
    task.doLast {
        println("Hello World")
    }
}

// With sam-with-receiver
tasks.register("hello") {
    // You can use the receiver
    doLast {
        println("Hello World")
    }
}
----

> The latter looks closer to `build.gradle.kts` scripts and more concise but is more prone to scoping errors as well.

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
The latter looks closer to `build.gradle.kts` scripts and is more concise but is prone to scoping errors as well.
```

[[sec:kotlin_assignment]]

> === `kotlin-assignment` compiler plugin

Reviewer 7: Is this worth mentioning yet? There's no instructions for how to use it or docs about it, and it seems generally unavailable.

Even when it's available though, is this a good API for plugin authors to use? Seems this should really be targeted solely for build scripts that are mostly using DSLs

Author: Good point. I put it for the sake of exhaustivity but not sure it's helpful to plugin authors. 

As a matter of fact, my preference goes to not using neither `sam-with-receiver` nor precompiled scripts plugins when developing custom plugins too. But there are lots of folks using `kotlin-dsl` to develop custom plugins so 🤷

Reviewer 4: There's a lot of gotcha with using Kotlin for plugin writing, so some features may not be recommended for the task. The Gradle team should pitch in on this.

The `kotlin-assignment` compiler plugin is still experimental. It allows overriding assignments so that Kotlin callers do not have to call `.set()` on https://docs.gradle.org/current/javadoc/org/gradle/api/provider/Property.html[Property]:

----
// Without kotlin-asignment
tasks.jar.configure {
    // You need to call .set()
    archiveBaseName.set("mylib")
}

// With kotlin-asignment
tasks.jar.configure {
    // No need to call .set()
    archiveBaseName = "mylib"
}
----

[[sec:api_version]]
=== `apiVersion` compiler option

The https://kotlinlang.org/docs/compiler-reference.html#api-version-version[Kotlin compiler apiVersion option] enforces that the generated bytecode only uses declaration from the given version. This is important to stay compatible with the Kotlin version embedded by Gradle.

Note: while this enforces your code is compatible with a given version of Kotlin stdlib and Gradle, it does not check dependencies, so it is important to check your dependencies are also compatible.

[[sec:sam_conversion_class]]
=== `-Xsam-conversions=class` compiler option

> `-Xsam-conversions=class` sets up the implementation strategy for SAM (single abstract method) conversion to always generate anonymous classes, instead of using the `invokedynamic` JVM instruction. This is to make sure the lambdas are serializable and provide a better support for configuration cache and incremental build. This is particularly important for lambdas used from `doLast:

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
`-Xsam-conversions=class` sets up the implementation strategy for SAM (single abstract method) conversion to always generate anonymous classes, instead of using the `invokedynamic` JVM instruction. This is to make sure the lambdas are serializable and provide better support for configuration cache and incremental build. This is particularly important for lambdas used from `doLast`:
```

See https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/17052[Issue #17052] for more information.

[source,kotlin]
----
// Without `-Xsam-conversions=class` task will never be up-to-date
task.doLast {
    // Something
}
----

[[sec:plugins_for_your_plugins]]

> == Different development plugins

Reviewer 4: The Gradle team needs to do something about this section. With my new user hat on, this isn't very clear. It should be straightforward. Until the Gradle team can improve the situation, this section is still good documentation of the problem.

In order to configure all the above options and more, Gradle offers several plugins:

* `"java-gradle-plugin"`
* `kotlin("jvm")` (id `"org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm"`)
* `embedded-kotlin` (id `"org.gradle.kotlin.embedded-kotlin"`))

> * `kotlin-dsl` (id `"org.gradle.kotlin.kotlin-dsl"`)

Reviewer 4: 🔍 I had a discussion with the Gradle team regarding the messy way to apply plugins in Kotlin; it's worth mentioning how confusing it can be to users: accessor (sometimes with backtick) vs `kotlin(<identifier>)` vs `id(<plugin-id>)`. The general conclusion was to prefer `id(<plugin-id>)` but it cannot work in all cases. We may want to take that into consideration here.

Author: +1. Having 3 ways to specify a plugin id is adding entropy in the system.

I'm team `id(<plugin-id>)` all the time. `embedded-kotlin` and `kotlin-dsl` are special because their version (but not the their implementation) is embedded into the Gradle distribution. My favourite solution there would be to have the Gradle core know about those ids and fail if a version is specified:

```
plugins {
  // Gradle knows about this and pulls the compatible version automatically
  id("org.gradle.kotlin.kotlin-dsl")
}

plugins {
  // Error: You cannot specify the version of org.gradle.kotlin.kotlin-dsl
  id("org.gradle.kotlin.kotlin-dsl").version("4.0.6")
}

plugins {
  // Users could still use a different "unsafe" pluginId if they know what they're doing
  // (naming up for grabs)
  id("org.gradle.kotlin.kotlin-dsl.unsafe").version("4.0.6")
}
```

Also I'd personally remove `kotlin("jvm")`. My version catalog files are already full of maven coordinates that I can't remember so adding one pluginId for Kotlin doesn't hurt and reduces the cognitive load of seeing `kotlin("jvm")` vs `org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm`.

Reviewer 4: I completely agree.

Usually you would choose one of those combinations:

* `"java-gradle-plugin"` and `kotlin("jvm")`
* `"java-gradle-plugin"` and `embedded-kotlin`
* `kotlin-dsl`

Let's see what each plugin is doing.

[[sec:java_gradle_plugin]]
=== The `"java-gradle-plugin"` plugin (built-in)

`"java-gradle-plugin"` amongst other things:

* applies the <<java_library_plugin.adoc#java_library_plugin,Java Library (`java-library`)>> plugin
* adds the `gradlePlugin {}` extension and generates the resource files matching your plugin id with its implementation class
* adds the `gradleApi()` dependency to the `api` configuration
* performs validation of plugin metadata during `jar` task execution.
* adds the `gradleTestKit()` dependency to the `testImplementation` configuration

You always want this plugin to develop custom Gradle plugins (although other plugins might apply it for you). Refer to the full <<java_gradle_plugin.adoc, documentation>> for more information.

[[sec:kotlin_jvm]]
=== The `kotlin("jvm")` plugin

> `kotlin("jvm")` is the plugin that configures the Kotlin compiler amongst many other things.

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
`kotlin("jvm")` is the plugin configuring the Kotlin compiler, amongst many other things.
```

> You usually always want this plugin to develop custom Gradle plugins (although other plugins might apply it for you). Refer to the full https://kotlinlang.org/docs/gradle.html[documentation] for more information.

Reviewer 2: usually and always don't go well together

Author: Oh my, good catch!

Reviewer 2: 🤩

[[sec:kotlin-dsl]]
=== The `kotlin-dsl` plugin

`kotlin-dsl` is built on top of `kotlin-embedded` and does the following:

* applies `"java-gradle-plugin"`
* applies `kotlin-embedded`
* applies the `kotlin-dsl-precompiled-script-plugins` allowing to use `build.gradle.kts` files
* adds `gradleKotlinDsl()` to the `compileOnly` configuration
* configures the `sam-with-receiver` Kotlin compiler plugin
* configures the `kotlin-assignment` Kotlin compiler plugin
* sets `apiVersion` and `languageVersion` to the Kotlin embedded version
* adds the `-Xsam-conversions=class` compiler option
* adds others compiler options for compatibility:
** `-java-parameters` to support https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/reflect/Parameter.html[Java 8 Parameter] class and getting method parameters through reflection
** `-Xjvm-default=all` to add link:https://kotlinlang.org/docs/java-to-kotlin-interop.html#default-methods-in-interfaces[Default methods in interfaces]
** `-Xjsr305=strict` for https://kotlinlang.org/docs/java-interop.html#compiler-configuration[increased null safety]

> The `kotlin-dsl` plugin is the-all-in-one plugin. By applying the `kotlin-dsl-precompiled-script-plugins` and the same options as Gradle when compiling scripts, it allows you to write plugin like you would write scripts, using `.gradle.kts` file.

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
The `kotlin-dsl` plugin is an all-in-one plugin. By applying the `kotlin-dsl-precompiled-script-plugins` and the same options as Gradle when compiling scripts, it allows you to write plugins like you would write scripts, using `.gradle.kts` file.
```

> Like the `embedded-kotlin` plugin, it uses the same Kotlin version as your Gradle build. This is useful if you do not intend to distribute your plugins, for an example, for convention plugins. If you need to distribute your plugin, make sure to use a Kotlin version that is compatible with the Gradle version you are targetting

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
Like the `embedded-kotlin` plugin, it uses the same Kotlin version as your Gradle build. This is useful if you do not intend to distribute your plugins, for example, for convention plugins. If you need to distribute your plugin, make sure to use a Kotlin version that is compatible with the Gradle version you are targeting
```

Author: > for example,

TIL, thanks!

[[sec:your_public_api]]
== Plugin API compatibility

> In order to make your plugin API compatible with Groovy, avoid relying on Kotlin specific features so that the developer experience is as good for Groovy scripts as for Kotlin scripts. For an example the Kotlin compiler emits https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/libraries/kotlinx-metadata/jvm/ReadMe.md[metadata] that only the Kotlin compiler can understand for features like default parameters or extension function. It is OK to use those to provide a better experience for Kotlin scripts as long as same functionality is accessible through other means in Groovy.

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
In order to make your plugin API compatible with Groovy, avoid relying on Kotlin specific features so that the developer experience is as good for Groovy scripts as for Kotlin scripts. 
For example, the Kotlin compiler emits https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/libraries/kotlinx-metadata/jvm/ReadMe.md[metadata] that only the Kotlin compiler can understand for features like default parameters or extension function. 
It is OK to use those to provide a better experience for Kotlin scripts as long as the same functionality is accessible through other means in Groovy.
```

In general, relying on link:{kotlin-reference}java-interop.html[calling Java from Kotlin recommendations] and link:{kotlin-reference}java-to-kotlin-interop.html[calling Kotlin from Java recommendations] works well for Groovy too.

[[sec:action]]
`Action`

> Do not use Kotlin function types in your API. Groovy doesn't know about Kotlin anything about. Groovy uses Closures.

Reviewer 6: ❓ 
This sentence is not clear to me:
"Groovy doesn't know about Kotlin anything about" I am taking a guess at what it should be
```suggestion
Do not use Kotlin function types in your API. Groovy doesn't know anything about Kotlin. Groovy uses Closures.
```

Instead, use an `Action<T>` parameter. Decorated Gradle objects contain an overload for every function that takes an `Action<T>` parameter:

[source,kotlin]
----
class Something

abstract class MyExtension {
    // Use Action<T> in your APIs
    // Gradle will generate an overload at runtime that takes a Groovy Closure
    fun doSomething(action: Action<Something>) {
        //
    }
}
----

> In order for the overload to be generated, the object must be constructed by Gradle. For an example:

Reviewer 6: 🧐 
```suggestion
For the overload to be generated, the object must be constructed by Gradle. For example:
```

[source,kotlin]
----
abstract class MyPlugin: Plugin<Project> {
  override fun apply(project: Project) {

>     project.extensions.create("myExtension", MyExtension::class.java)

Reviewer 2: With the DSL dependency added, I guess this looks a bit nicer

```
    project.extensions.create<MyExtension>("myExtension")
```

Author: Given this is in the "public API" section, I went for the most compatible option. It will work no matter what plugins you use.

The https://kotlinlang.org/docs/compiler-reference.html#api-version-version[Kotlin compiler apiVersion option] enforces that the generated bytecode only uses declaration from the given version. This is important to stay compatible with the Kotlin version embedded by Gradle.

Note: while this enforces your code is compatible with a given version of Kotlin stdlib and Gradle, it does not check dependencies, so it is important to check your dependencies are also compatible.

[[sec:sam_conversion_class]]
=== `-Xsam-conversions=class` compiler option

`-Xsam-conversions=class` sets up the implementation strategy for SAM (single abstract method) conversion to always generate anonymous classes, instead of using the `invokedynamic` JVM instruction. This is to make sure the lambdas are serializable and provide better support for configuration cache and incremental build. This is particularly important for lambdas used from `doLast`:
See https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/17052[Issue #17052] for more information.

[source,kotlin]
----
// Without `-Xsam-conversions=class` task will never be up-to-date
task.doLast {
    // Something
}
----

[[sec:plugins_for_your_plugins]]

> == Different development plugins

Reviewer 8: This section, in its rendered form is very hard to follow and understand. It's a long wall of list items. We need to find a better structure for it.

* `"java-gradle-plugin"`
* `kotlin("jvm")` (id `"org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm"`)
* `embedded-kotlin` (id `"org.gradle.kotlin.embedded-kotlin"`))
* `kotlin-dsl` (id `"org.gradle.kotlin.kotlin-dsl"`)

Usually you would choose one of those combinations:

* `"java-gradle-plugin"` and `kotlin("jvm")`
* `"java-gradle-plugin"` and `embedded-kotlin`
* `kotlin-dsl`

Let's see what each plugin is doing.

[[sec:java_gradle_plugin]]
=== The `"java-gradle-plugin"` plugin (built-in)

`"java-gradle-plugin"` amongst other things:

* applies the <<java_library_plugin.adoc#java_library_plugin,Java Library (`java-library`)>> plugin
* adds the `gradlePlugin {}` extension and generates the resource files matching your plugin id with its implementation class
* adds the `gradleApi()` dependency to the `api` configuration
* performs validation of plugin metadata during `jar` task execution.
* adds the `gradleTestKit()` dependency to the `testImplementation` configuration

You always want this plugin to develop custom Gradle plugins (although other plugins might apply it for you). Refer to the full <<java_gradle_plugin.adoc, documentation>> for more information.

[[sec:kotlin_jvm]]

> === The `kotlin("jvm")` plugin

Reviewer 8: This can become very confusing for somebody who doesn't know that the "kotlin(String)" function here is just a helper for building plugin IDs. Better use raw plugin IDs instead.

Author: Yea agreed. See also [this comment](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/pull/24286/files#r1135314524). I'd love to remove `kotlin("jvm")`.

I'm updating this PR to use the plugin id primarily for Kotlin Gradle Plugin and keep `kotlin-embedded` and `kotlin-dsl` as is because there is just too much brain muscle
